That’s Barbara in the third row from the back of the sanctuary, the one with the sunglasses holding up her tangle of orange hair, see her? Hair like a nest of copper wiring? The one slowly rocking? Both hands beneath her belly as if she were holding a large salad bowl; she’s more than eight months pregnant. It’s February 12, 1966, and Barbara’s in the new Shaarey Zedek in Southfield, six exits away from Chicago Boulevard, Detroit, where the old synagogue used to be. It’s still there, actually. Now they’ve sold it to a Pentecostal church. It’s been four years since the congregation decamped to the suburbs, and the new place still gleams. The fresh paint smells like vanilla, and the triangular point of the roof inspires as it juts out across the freeway like a plane taking off. At the moment the place is jammed, more than seven hundred people, not a seat is empty. It’s hot, and Barbara’s woozy. All she wants is for the service to be over so she can go home. She’s here because she didn’t want to be at home. The circle of life. From one place we don’t want to be to another.

And still the rabbi talks. The renowned, beloved, silver-tongued Morris Adler, “the most quoted rabbi in America,” intones, expounds on Abraham Lincoln in
honor of the sixteenth President’s birthday. Barbara’s paying no attention.

She’s forgotten her regular glasses (what’s there to see in temple anyway?), and, for no reason she’ll be able to explain later, she slides her sunglasses down onto her face. Everything goes darker as her hair collapses to her shoulders.

Rabbi Adler’s voice tends to slow when he’s nearly finished—son . . . his . . . own . . . flesh—and so there’s hope that this could end, and Barbara becomes, incrementally, more awake. The rabbi’s words are like shapes, and she imagines them raining from the skylights like fat white drops of light, plopping one by one on her head and on the heads of all the others, the ones who’ve been listening and the ones who’ve been dozing, exploding with a little piff that only Barbara is attuned to hear.

And now that they’ve stopped, the funny little explosions, and the rabbi has returned to his seat on the bimah next to the bar-mitzvah boy, Barbara thinks, suddenly, about food. She hadn’t realized how hungry she’d become—funny how one moment you’re not hungry, and the next you’re so famished that you could reach down and chew on your neighbor’s shoe, Nell Eisendrath’s high-heeled shoe, because all you are is hunger, from your toes to your eyebrows.

The cantor begins Kaddish in a voice low and monotonous yet somehow beautiful with the weight of how many times the prayer has been sung—if she comes for anything she comes for the music—and Barbara rocks, she rocks like the overloaded boat she’s become, and that’s when a young man with small, round glasses and porcupine hair rises from his seat, up near the front, and walks toward the bimah. Barbara is too far away to see what’s in his hand, and after he fires a single shot into the ceiling the sound is so alien to the space, so incomprehensible, that it takes Barbara a moment to start to register what has just happened, and even then she isn’t sure, in the jittery quiet that follows, exactly what’s going on. The young man orders the bar-mitzvah boy off the bimah. The rabbi, as if by some prior agreement, stays put as the young man takes the cantor’s place behind the microphone.

Even if she had her glasses, Barbara would be too far away to see this clearly from where she’s sitting. Like many eyewitnesses, she will learn what happened from the paper afterward. But in that moment, a moment throbbed into her memory, she listens, or tries to listen, as this young man—kid, really—begins to deliver his own version of a sermon, and, though Barbara can’t make heads or tails out of what he’s saying, she’s entranced, so entranced that she leans forward until her belly is resting against the back of the chair in front of her, and her head dangles over the trembling shoulder of the woman in that chair, as the young man speaks. This congregation is a travesty and an abomination, it has made a mockery by its phoniness and hypocrisy. . . . Barbara considers, her head so close to the woman’s ear she could lick it, how much anger there is in the air these days, a seething, scattershot anger. Her husband, Howard, for instance, how he goes on and on about the Blacks. The Blacks, he says. What are we going to do about the Blacks? And she says, What do you know about Blacks, Howard? You never hire any. And Howard says, Plenty. Don’t I read the Free Press? What more do I need to— But, unlike Howard’s, this boy’s anger, whatever he’s talking about, isn’t a rant at breakfast; this is passion, the genuine article, right here, right now.


Moments later, when the young man abruptly stops and swings around and says, “Rabbi,” before shooting Rabbi Adler once in the arm and then again in the left side of the head, and then holds the barrel up to his own forehead and fires, Barbara is, again, bewildered. How, when she was watching him so closely, granted through dark glasses, did she miss the fact that he was still waving that gun around? Pandemonium in the sanctuary now, hollering, screeching, chairs overturning and a cavalcade of frantic people pushing each other forward, back- ward, somewhere, anywhere. Since she’s so obviously pregnant, a few of the more gallant men attempt to steer her toward the exit. But Barbara holds her ground and thinks for a few long seconds before she begins to move in the oppo- site direction, pushing against the current of onrushing bodies. The president of the congregation pleads over the microphone for a doctor in the house. A chorus responds, even those making their way out the door—I’m a doctor, I’m a doctor—and Barbara, with her wild tangerine hair, her hands still clutching her belly, struggling against all those advancing in the opposite direction, nearly laughs out loud. Even the dentists, she thinks, the chiropractors, the podiatrists, all are calling out, I’m a doctor, a doctor!

She never made it to the young man. A member of the congregation, a sub- stitute schoolteacher, a deranged suspected Communist, the papers said, a nut, a fanatic. In his room they found pages ranting about Robert McNamara and the dehumanization of society. We are building not men but a generation of barbarians and mediocrities. . . . Zombies. . . . His parents and his sister were all present the morning he shot the rabbi. Barbara didn’t reach him. Didn’t hold that shattered face in her hands. The force of the crowd trying to get out was too strong, and she was thrust into the parking lot and the thick, unworldly silence that still coats stories of that sunny February morning, even as car doors slammed and engines rasped to life and distant sirens moved closer.

Can we take you home, Barbara?

Thank you. I have my husband’s car.

She was my mother’s favorite cousin, Barbara, a woman who, my mother says, always danced to her own beat. Who told good stories and laughed a lot and didn’t care a lick about what anybody thought. About that morning, though, she never talked much, but my mother remembers when she did pipe up, briefly, a few months later, the whole family together around the long table at Grandma Burt’s, and Barbara spoke in defense of the murderer and was shouted down by everybody, not just the men. It was beyond shameful. Jews getting into the act? Shooting people? Other Jews? In Palestine, sure, but in Detroit?

I’d like to report that she dumped Howard and split to California or Morocco, the kid in tow. A free spirit, my mother’s favorite cousin Barbara, but not too much of one. Howard took over his father’s lumberyard on the east side, and for years made a good living. Barbara died a few years ago, at eighty-one. Howard’s in a nursing home somewhere.

Of course, thousands of people attended Rabbi Adler’s funeral at the temple. They also named an elementary school after him. Who would know, or care, that a pregnant relative of mine stood in the parking lot that morning and half wished she were carrying a martyr’s baby?