February, 1991. The first night on the ship, I wore a cobalt velvet jacket with a shawl collar, stonewashed jeans, and a necklace bearing three tiers of iridescent orbs, an unintentional nod to the disco ball that would cast the ballroom in a glittering glow. I was barely a teen-ager, and, from my view across the dining room, I appeared to be the sole female passenger on the cruise ship carrying several hundred gay men from Miami, Florida, to San Juan, Puerto Rico, over the course of seven days—and definitely the only kid. I was travelling with my father, who, less than eighteen months later, would die after a five-year battle with aids. But, for the moment, he was well—at least well enough to take his daughter on a Caribbean vacation.

Fitting me into his gay life style, one that did not typically accommodate children, was my father’s norm. I don’t know whether he was driven by a desire to express himself fully, to compromise neither his identity as a gay man nor as a parent, or by a lack of willingness to sacrifice any time in a world that he had spent most of his life denying. My dad had grown up in the Bronx, the son of first-generation Jewish immigrants who had transcended their Depression-era childhoods to become successful professionals. He himself would become a sought-after advertising executive who worked with arts organizations in New York. All along, there was an expectation, both internal and external, that my father would marry a woman and have a family. He had discussed his early homosexual desire with a therapist, who dismissed it as unresolved envy of his more athletic childhood friends, and, eventually, he married my mother and had me. Two years later, his affair with a man ended the marriage. From that point forward, he made minimal effort to conform his life to mine—it was always the other way around.

Some of my earliest memories are of summer weekends in a shared house in the Fire Island Pines, waking up at dawn just as my father was coming home from the Pavilion, the local night club. He would make pancakes, then crawl into bed for an hour or two of sleep before we’d hit the beach, where I would watch shirtless hunks play gruelling games of volleyball and hope that someone with a pool would invite us over to swim. We would celebrate my August birthday with an ice-cream social—the guests were his friends. Gay men really know how to shop for little girls—a glittery wand, a stuffed talking parrot, and an inordinately wide-brimmed pink hat were just some of the gifts I received.

Though I was a novelty in my father’s world—there was only one other family with children in the Pines that I knew, and they were a straight family—the beach community offered a freedom that I did not possess in my regular life at a Brooklyn private school where classmates threw around the word “fag” without a second thought and where I worked vigilantly to hide that my father was gay—and that he was sick. One peer knew because her stepfather was a school administrator, and, consequently, she was not allowed to come over to my house, because he feared that she would become infected with H.I.V., despite clinical evidence to the contrary.

It is perhaps difficult to imagine now the stigma that being gay and H.I.V.-positive carried during the height of the aids epidemic, but as a child I felt it. Although my parents did not openly express shame or fear about my father’s identity, I knew that my father’s dentist had refused to treat him after his diagnosis. I knew that my grandparents would not allow my father to bring a gay friend for Thanksgiving dinner. I knew that Ronald Reagan’s Administration had laughed off early questions about the “gay plague,” avoided publicly mentioning aids until the mid-nineteen-eighties (at which point at least fifty-five hundred Americans had died of the disease), and suggested that amoral behavior was a significant contributing factor in H.I.V. infections. But I didn’t know any other kids with families like mine. The truth would, I imagined, bring with it the demise of whatever social life I had. So I hid. I lied. I deflected. I covered up. And, most of all, I worried that I would be unmasked as the daughter of an H.I.V.-infected homosexual.

But among the gays I could relax. As I breezed into the ship’s dining room on that first night of the cruise, my father by my side, I took in the groups of men, most of them handsome and young, many of them also sick with a disease that was still at the time a death sentence, and nothing about where I was struck me as odd. The spectrum of “gay”—from the most gorgeous Adonis to the saltiest old coot; the telltale hollow cheeks and rail-thin frame of the dying to the colorful accent of a drag queen’s sparkly gown among a sea of dark dinner jackets—all of it was familiar from summers in the Pines. And there was a palpable sense of community—a unity that I also recognized. Here, whether sick or healthy, old or young, all were welcome. The shared experience of being gay in a world that didn’t always accept gayness created a sense of connection.

On the ship, I was adored, fawned over. The men would comment on my golden-flecked wavy hair, almond-shaped brown eyes, and lithe limbs. They asked about my makeup. They complimented my clothes. As a young teen beset with the usual amount of discomfort and insecurity about my changing body, handsome men noticing my looks was a welcome boost to my burgeoning sense of womanhood. I felt beautiful here, special—modes of being I did not experience at school, where attention from boys came with unwelcome questions about my family life. A middle-school crush spoke of how his family summered on Fire Island, but in the wealthy, politically conservative town of Point o’Woods. My desire to bond with him led me to respond, “Mine does, too,” only to have me freeze in terror, then lie, when he asked where our house was.

Perhaps being on the cruise, where I held a certain pride of place—or imagined I did—gave me the courage to meet the gaze of the young man whom I caught staring at me the next day during bingo. As a bejewelled queen in a chiffon robe called out the numbers, never missing a chance to throw in a dash of sexual innuendo (“Everyone’s favorite, O-69!”), I noticed the young man in his crew worker’s polo and crisp chino shorts, his dark hair forming a soft wave across the top of his head. He worked on the boat and seemed to be about eighteen years old. And he was looking right at me. The exchange of glances lasted just long enough to give my pulse a jolt and make the room seem to sway. Wait, it was swaying. We were out in the middle of the Caribbean.

Later that afternoon, I wandered around the ship alone, flashing back to his cool stare and good looks, hoping we might cross paths. The thrill of that possibility mingled with terror inside me—what would I do if we did? What would I say? Would I smile? Would my smile, with its crooked teeth, betray me as just a kid? I wanted him to think of me as a person, as a woman even, though I had no idea what that really meant. I had kissed a couple of boys at summer camp. I remember sitting in the darkness of a movie theatre, the feeling of a boy’s hand on my leg and knowing that he was about to lean in and press his lips to mine. I remember feeling like it didn’t matter to him that it was me, like I could have been anyone, like I was just a ghost somehow—or an idea, an acquisition.

I came upon the ship’s gift shop, a small square space filled with toiletries, candy, mass-market paperbacks, and trinkets. A statuesque young woman in a uniform two sizes too large stood behind the register. I felt her eyes on me as I moved along the shelves. “You are here by yourself?” Her accent was French, and her words had the quality of being tossed lightly through the air. “I’m with my father,” I replied. Her name was Claire. She was Canadian, taking a break from university, and seemed instantly invested in my having a place to go and someone to talk to. She invited me to come back the next day.

That night, my dad and I went to the outdoor disco. My father loved to dance, but I was hesitant. Rather than join him, I took a seat on the fringes and watched him in his white jeans and T-shirt. He moved freely, with a joy I rarely saw him express. All the men did, and I began to understand the significance of the dance floor. Many of these men had spent decades hiding who they were. Most of them were still hiding in one form or another—in jobs, in families, while walking the streets of New York City where we lived. One could come out as gay, but, under the shadow of aids and a conservative government, unqualified freedom and acceptance remained perilous and elusive. Not only that—these men were living in the face of unfathomable loss. Looking back, I can understand now that, for more than a decade, they had been burying friends and lovers, watching them die in horrible ways, and contending with their own declining health while, it seemed, no one in power valued their lives enough to help.

On the dance floor, it was different. The dance floor was a space for celebration, for exaltation, for escape. The men filling it were free to be themselves, free to flood their ailing bodies with endorphins, free to be together in a community that understood and adored one another. It was like a church where the d.j. was preacher, house beat was heartbeat, and God did not discriminate. I wanted to know what that felt like, but I was afraid. This was their turf; I was just a visitor. More liberated than at school, but still an outsider, and, because I had always lived in a state of hiding a huge part of my identity—my family story—I questioned my very self. I didn’t know how to move.

We didn’t stay long at the disco. My father tired easily, and one of his legs, increasingly riddled with Kaposi's-sarcoma lesions, courtesy of his dwindling immune system, was bothering him. We went to bed, and I lay awake with the unease that comes from letting fear win out. I went back to see Claire the next day, and the young man from bingo was standing right there in the gift shop. He and Claire were friends. Or were they something more? My mind reeled through various scenarios as I tried to look as alluring and aloof as possible. His name was Tom, and he was even more handsome up close.

Claire, Tom, and I spent much of the remaining time on the ship together, hanging out in the crew’s quarters listening to music, wandering the decks, eating candy in the gift shop. I recall few details about Tom, aside from his great hair, his athletic build and kind eyes. I couldn’t tell you where he was from or what we talked about. None of that mattered. What has stayed with me across three decades is how I felt in his presence: at ease, myself, real. It was the first time a boy had known the truth about my family. He did not behave inappropriately or act on the attraction, but it was undeniably there—obvious even to my dad, who teased me about it after a day trip to a Caribbean beach where Tom and I spent hours splashing in the surf.

On the last night of the voyage, the eighties pop icon and singer Laura Branigan was set to perform. Though I had only a vague sense of who she was, this was to be the highlight of the week’s entertainment. Everyone was talking about it. Dinner before was a black-tie affair, and I had brought a special dress—a Laura Ashley strapless number with a black velvet bodice and purple taffeta skirt. As the sun set against a periwinkle sky, I took a walk on the deck. I recall the sound of the fabric rustling in the breeze and a chill spreading across my bare, tanned arms. I can hear the click of my black suede pumps on wooden slats. I can see my father’s face light up upon seeing me.

That night I danced. In a throng of gay men, with Tom and Claire, with my dying dad by my side, as Laura Branigan sang “Gloria” and the ship rocked with the waves of a passing storm, I let myself go. I let joy spread through me, even as I feared this might be the last time my father and I ever shared a dance floor. (It was.) That night, we moved together. We felt and sang and danced together—the rhythm binding us, the crowd embracing us, the present moment the only truth there was.